Nay, but this dotage of ourgeneral's overflows the measure.
Those his goodly eyes that overthe files
and musters of the war haveglowed like plated Mars
now bend, now turn the officeand devotion
of their view upon a tawnyfront.
His captain's heart, which, inthe scuffles of great fights,
hath burst the buckles on hisbreast,
reneges all temper
and is become the bellows andthe fan to cool a gypsy's lust.
Here they come.
Take a good note,
and you will see in him, thetriple pillar of the world,
transformed into a strumpet'sfool.
If it be love indeed, tell mehow much.
There's beggary in the love thatcan be reckoned.
I'll set a bourn how far to bebeloved.
Then must thou needs find outnew heaven, new earth.
News, my good lord, from Rome.
Grates me: the sum.
Nay, hear them, Antony.
Fulvia perchance is angry,
or who knows if thescarce-bearded Caesar
have not sent his powerfulmandate to you?
"Do this or this.
"Take in that kingdom andenfranchise that.
Perform it, or else we damnthee."
Oh, my love.
Perchance nay and most like:
You must not stay here longer.
Your dismission is come fromCaesar.
Therefore, hear it, Antony.
Where's Fulvia's process?
Caesar's I would say? Both?
As I am Egypt's queen, thoublushest, Antony,
and that blood of thine isCaesar's homager.
Else so thy cheek pays shame
when shrill-tongued Fulviascolds.
The messengers.
Let Rome in Tiber melt
and the wide arch of the rangedempire fall.
Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay.
Our dungy earth alike feedsbeast as man.
The nobleness of life is to dothus.
When such a mutual pair and sucha twain can do it,
in which I bind on pain ofpunishment
the world to weet, we stand uppeerless.
Excellent falsehood.
Why, did he marry Fulvia and notlove her?
I'll seem the fool, I am not.
Antony will be himself.
But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now, for the love of love andher soft hours,
let's not confound the time withconference harsh.
There's not a minute of ourlives should stretch
without some pleasure now.
What sport tonight?
Hear the ambassadors.
Fie, wrangling queen,
whom everything becomes tochide, to laugh, to weep,
whose every passion fullystrives
to make itself in thee fair andadmired!
No messenger but thine.
And all alone tonight we'llwander through the streets
and note the qualities ofpeople.
Come, my queen.
Last night, you did desire it.Speak not to us.
Is Caesar with Antonius prizedso slight?
Sir, sometimes when he is notAntony,
he comes too short of that greatproperty,
which still should go withAntony.
I am full sorry he approves thecommon liar,
who thus speaks of him at Rome.
I'll have of better deedstomorrow.
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, mostanything Alexas,
almost most absolute Alexas,
where's the soothsayer
that you praised so to thequeen?
Soothsayer.
Your will?
Is this the man?
Is it you, sir, that knowthings?
In nature's infinite book ofsecrecy, a little I can read.
Show him your hand.
Good sir, give me good fortune.
I make not but foresee.
Pray, then, foresee me one.
You shall be yet far fairer thanyou are.
He means in flesh.
No, you shall paint when you'reold.
Wrinkles forbid!
Vex not his prescience; beattentive.
Hush.
You shall be more beloving thanbeloved.
I'd rather heat my liver withdrinking.
Nay, hear him.
Good now, some excellentfortune.
Let me be married to three kingsin a forenoon
and widow them all.
Find me to marry me withOctavius Caesar,
and companion me with mymistress.
You shall outlive the lady whomyou serve.
Excellent! I love long lifebetter than figs.
You have seen and proved afairer former fortune
than that which is to approach.
Prithee, how many boys andwenches must I have?
If every of your wishes had awomb
and fertile every wish, amillion.
Out, fool! I forgive thee for awitch.
You think none but your sheetsare privy to your wishes.
Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
We'll know all our fortunes.
Mine and most of our fortunestonight
shall be drunk to bed.
There's a palm presageschastity, if nothing else.
Even as the o'erflowing Niluspresageth famine?
Go, you wild bedfellow.
You cannot soothsay.
Prithee, tell her but aworky-day fortune.
Your fortunes are alike.
Oh, but how? But how?
Give me particulars.
I have said.
Am I not an inch of fortunebetter than she?
Well, if you were but an inch offortune better than I,
where would you choose it?
Not in my husband's nose.
Our worser thoughts heavensmend!
Alexas, come; his fortune, hisfortune.
Let him marry a woman thatcannot go,
sweet Isis, I beseech thee!
And let her die too and give hima worse.
And let worse follow worse,
till the worst of all follow himlaughing to his grave,
fifty-fold a cuckold!
Amen.
Dear goddess, hear that prayerof the people,
for as it is a heartbreaking
to see a handsome manloose-wived,
so it is a deadly sorrow
to behold a foul knaveuncuckolded.
Saw you my lord?
No, lady.
Was he not here?
No, madam.
He was disposed to mirth,
but on the sudden a Romanthought hath struck him.
Enobarbus!
Madam?
Seek him and bring him hither.
Where's Alexas?
Here, at your service.
My lord approaches.
We will not look upon him.
Go with us.
Fulvia, thy wife, first cameinto the field.
Against my brother Lucius?
Aye, but soon that war had end,
and the time's state madefriends of them,
jointing their force againstCaesar
whose better issue in the warfrom Italy
upon the first encounter dravethem.
Well, what worst?
The nature of bad news infectsthe teller.
When it concerns the fool orcoward.
On, things that are past aredone with me.
'Tis thus who tells me true,though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flattered.
Labienusó this is stiff newsó
hath with his Parthian forceextended Asia from Euphrates.
His conquering banner shook
from Syria to Lydia and toIonia, whilstó
Antony, thou wouldst sayó
Oh, my lord.
Speak to me home.
Mince not the general tongue.
Name Cleopatra as she is calledin Rome.
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase,
and taunt my faults with suchfull licence
as both truth and malice havepower to utter.
Then we bring forth weeds
when our quick minds lie still
and our ills told us is as ourearing.
Fare thee well awhile.
At your noble pleasure.
These strong Egyptian fetters Imust break
or lose myself in dotage.
What are you?
Fulvia, thy wife, is dead.
Where died she?
In Sicyon.
Her length of sickness with whatelse more serious
importeth thee to know, thisbears.
Forbear me.
There's a great spirit gone!
Thus did I desire it.
What our contempts doth oftenhurl from us,
we wish it ours again.
The present pleasure byrevolution
lowerings become the opposite ofitself.
She's good being gone.
The hand could pluck her backthat shoved her on.
I must from this enchantingqueen break off.
Ten thousand harms more than theills
that I know my idleness dothhatch.
How now. Enobarbus.
What's your pleasure, sir?
I must with haste from hence.
Why, then, we kill all ourwomen.
We see how mortal an unkindnessis to them.
If they suffer our departure,death's the word.
I must be gone.
Under a compelling occasion, letwomen die.
It were pity to cast them awayfor nothing.
Though between them and a greatcause,
they should be esteemed nothing.
Cleopatra, catching but theleast noise of this,
dies instantly.
I've seen her die twenty timesupon a far poorer moment.
I do think there is mettle indeath,
which commits some loving actupon her.
She hath such a celerity indying.
She is cunning past man'sthought.
Alack, sir, no.
Her passions are made of nothing
but the finest part of purelove.
We cannot call her winds andwaters, sighs and tears.
They are greater storms andtempests
than almanacs can report.
Would I had never seen her.
Oh, sir.
You had then left unseen awonderful piece of work,
which not to have been blestwithal
would have discredited yourtravel.
Fulvia is dead.
Sir?
Fulvia?
Dead!
Why, sir, give the gods athankful sacrifice.
When it pleaseth their deities
to take the wife of a man fromhim,
it shows to man the tailors ofthe earth,
comforting therein that when oldrobes are worn out,
there are members to make new.
If there were no more women butFulvia,
then had you indeed a cut andthe case to be lamented.
The tears live in an onion thatshould water this sorrow.
The business she hath broachedin the state
cannot endure my absence.
The business you have broachedhere
cannot be without you,
especially that of Cleopatra,
which wholly depends on yourabode.
No more light answers.
Let our officers have noticewhat we purpose.
I shall break the cause of ourexpedience to the queen
and get her leave to part.
For not alone the death ofFulvia
with more urgent touches dostrongly speak to us,
but the letters, too, of manyour contriving friends
in Rome petition us at home.
Sextus Pompeius hath given thedare to Caesar
and commands the empire of thesea.
Say our pleasure to such whoseplace is under us
requires our quick remove fromhence.
I shall do it.
Where is he?
See where he is,
who's with him, what he does.
I did not send you.
If you find him sad, say I amdancing.
If in mirth, report that I amsudden sick.
Quick and return.
Madam, methinks if you did lovehim dearly,
you do not hold the method toenforce the like from him.
What should I do, I do not?
In each thing, give him way.Cross him in nothing.
Thou teachest like a fool theway to lose him.
Tempt him not so too far, I wishforbear.
In time we hate that which weoften fear.
But here comes Antony.
I am sick and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing tomy purpose.
Help me away, dear Charmian; Ishall fall.
It cannot be thus long.
The sides of nature will notsustain it.
Now, my dearest queenó
Pray you, stand farther from me.
What's the matter?
I know by that same eye there'ssome good news.
What says the married woman?
You may go.
Would she had never given youleave to come!
Let her not say 'tis I that keepyou here.
I have no power upon you; hersyou are.
The gods best knowó
Oh, never was there a queen somightily betrayed.
Yet at the first, I saw thetreasons planted.
Cleopatraó
Why should I think you can bemine and true
though you in swearing shake thethroned gods
who have been false to Fulvia?
Most sweet queenó
Nay, pray you, seek no color foryour going
but bid farewell and go.
When you sued staying, then wasthe time for words.
No going then.
Eternity was in our lips andeyes,
bliss in our brows bent.
None our parts so poor but was arace of heaven.
They are so still.
Or thou, the greatest soldier ofthe world,
art turned the greatest liar.
How now, lady!
I would I had thy inches.
Thou shouldst know there were aheart in Egypt.
Hear me, queen.
The strong necessity of timecommands our services awhile,
but my full heart remains in usewith you.
Our Italy shines o'er with civilswords.
Sextus Pompeius makes hisapproaches to the port of Rome.
Equality of two domestic powersbreed scrupulous faction.
The hated, grown to strength,are newly grown to love.
My more particular
and that which most with youshould safe my going
is Fulvia's death.
Though age from folly could notgive me freedom,
it does from childishness.
Can Fulvia die?
She's dead, my queen.
Look here,
and at thy sovereign leisureread the garboils she awaked.
At the last best, see when andwhere she died.
O most false love!
Where be the sacred vials
thou shouldst fill withsorrowful water?
Now I see, I see in Fulvia'sdeath,
how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but be preparedto know the purposes I bear,
which are or cease as you shallgive the advice.
By the fire that quickens Nilus'slime,
I go from hence thy soldier,servant,
making peace or war as thouaffect'st.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come, butlet it be.
I am quickly ill and well, soAntony loves.
My precious queen, forbear,
and give true evidence to hislove,
which stands an honorable trial.
So Fulvia told me.
I prithee, turn aside and weepfor her,
then bid adieu to me and say thetears belong to Egypt.
Good now, play one scene ofexcellent dissembling
and let it look like perfecthonor.
You'll heat my blood no more.
You can do better yet, but thisis meetly.
I'll leave you, lady.
Courteous lord, one word, sir.
You and I must part.
Oh, that's not it.
Sir, you and I have loved, butthere's not it.
That you know well ,something itis I would.
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
and I am all forgotten.
But that your royalty holdsidleness your subject,
I should take you for idlenessitself.
Sir, forgive me.
Since my becomings kill me whenthey do not eye well to you.
Your honor calls you hence.
Therefore, be deaf to myunpitied folly,
and all the gods go with you.
Upon your sword sit laurelvictory,
and smooth success be strewedbefore your feet.
Let us go. Come.
Our separation so abides andflies
that thou residing here goes yetwith me,
and I, hence fleeting here,remain with thee.
Away.
You may see, Lepidus, andhenceforth know
it is not Caesar's natural viceto hate our great competitor.
From Alexandria, this is thenews.
He fishes, drinks, and wastesthe lamps of night in revel.
Is not more man-like thanCleopatra.
Nor the queen of Ptolemy morewomanly than he.
Hardly gave audience
or vouchsafed to think he hadpartners.
You shall find there a man whois the abstract
of all faults that all menfollow.
I must not think there are evilsenough to darken all hisgoodness.
His faults in him seem as thespots of heavenó
more fiery by night's blackness,
hereditary rather thanpurchased,
what he cannot change than whathe chooses.
You are too indulgent.
Let's grant, it is not amiss totumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
to give a kingdom for a mirth,
to sit and keep the turn oftippling with a slave,
to reel the streets at noon
and stand the buffet with knavesthat smell of sweat.
Say this becomes him.
As his composure must be rareindeed
whom these things cannotblemish,
yet must Antony no way excusehis foils
when we do bear so great weightin his lightness.
If he filled his vacancy withhis voluptuousness,
full surfeits and the dryness ofhis bones call on him for it.
But to confound such time thatdrums him from his sport
and speaks as loud as his ownstate and ours,
'tis to be chid
as we rate boys, who, beingmature in knowledge,
pawn their experience to theirpresent pleasure
and so rebel to judgment.
Here's more news.
Thy biddings have been done.
And every hour, most nobleCaesar,
shalt thou have report how 'tisabroad.
Pompey is strong at sea,
and it appears he is beloved bythose that only have fearedCaesar.
To the ports the discontentsrepair,
and men's reports give him muchwronged.
I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from theprimal state
that he which is was wisheduntil he were.
And the ebbed man, ne'er lovedtill ne'er worth love,
comes deared by being lacked.
This common body,
like to a vagabond flag upon thestream,
goes to and back, lackeying thevarying tide
to rot itself with motion.
Caesar, I bring thee word,
Menecrates and Menas, famouspirates,
make the sea serve them,
which they ear and wound withkeels of every kind.
Many hot inroads they make inItaly.
The borders maritime lack bloodto think on't
and flush youth revolt.
No vessel can peep forth, but'tis as soon taken as seen,
for Pompey's name strikes morethan could his war resisted.
Antony, leave thy lasciviouswassails.
When thou once was beaten fromModena,
where thou slewest Hirtius andPansa, consuls,
at thy heel did famine follow,
whom thou fought'st against,though daintily brought up,
with patience more than savagescould suffer.
Thou didst drink the stale ofhorses
and the gilded puddle whichbeasts would cough at.
Thy palate then did deign theroughest berry on the rudesthedge.
Yea, like the stag, when snowthe pasture sheets,
the barks of trees thou browsed.
On the Alps, it is reported thoudidst eat strange flesh,
which some did die to look on.
And all thisó
it wounds thine honor that Ispeak it nowó
was borne so like a soldier
that thy cheek so much as lankednot.
'Tis pity of him.
Let his shames quickly drive himto Rome.
'Tis time we twain did showourselves in the field.
To that end, assemble weimmediate council.
Pompey thrives in our idleness.
Tomorrow, Caesar, I shall befurnished to inform you rightly
both what by sea and land I canbe able to front this presenttime.
Till which encounter, it is mybusiness too. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord.
What you shall know of meantimestirs abroad,
I shall beseech you, sir, to letme be partaker.
Doubt not, sir; I knew it for mybond.
Charmian.
Madam?
Give me to drink mandragora.
Why, madam?
That I might sleep out thisgreat gap of time my Antony isaway.
You think of him too much.
O, 'tis treason.
Madam, I trust not so.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
What's your majesty pleasure?
Not now to hear thee sing.
I take no pleasure in aught aneunuch has.
Hast thou affections?
Yes, gracious madam.
Indeed!
Not in deed, madam, for I can donothing,
but what indeed is honest to bedone.
Yet have I fierce affections
and think what Venus did withMars.
O Charmian,
where think'st thou he is now?
Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk, or is he on hishorse?
O happy horse, to bear theweight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse, for wot'stthou whom thou movest?
The demi-Atlas of this earth,
the arm and burgonet of men.
He's speaking now
or murmuring, "Where's myserpent of old Nile?"ó
so he calls me.
Now I feed myself with mostdelicious poison.
Think on me,
that I am with Phoebus' amorouspinches black
and wrinkled deep in time.
Broad-fronted Caesar,
when thou wast here above theground,
I was a morsel for a monarch.
And great Pompey would stand
and make his eyes grow in mybrow.
There would he anchor his aspectand die
with looking on his life.
Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
How much unlike art thou MarkAntony.
Yet coming from him,
that great medicine hath withhis tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave MarkAntony?
Last thing he did, dear queen,
he kissedóthe last of manydoubled kissesó
this orient pearl.
His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
"Good friend," quoth he,
"say, the firm Roman to greatEgypt
"sends this treasure of anoyster
"at whose foot to mend the pettypresent,
"I will piece her opulent thronewith kingdoms.
All the east, say thou, shallcall her mistress."
What was he, sad or merry?
Like to the time of the year
between the extremes of hot andcold,
he was nor sad nor merry.
O well-divided disposition!
Note him; note him, goodCharmian.
'Tis the man, but note him.
He was not sad,
for he would shine on those thatmake their looks by his.
He was not merry, which seemedto tell them
his remembrance lay in Egyptwith his joy,
but between both.
O heavenly mingle!
Be'st thou sad or merry.
The violence of either theebecomes so does it no man else.
Met'st thou my posts?
Aye, madam, twenty severalmessengers.
Why do you send so thick?
Who's born that day when Iforget to send to Antony
shall die a beggar.
Ink and paper, Charmian.
Welcome, my good Alexas.
Did I, Charmian, ever loveCaesar so?
O that brave Caesar!
Be choked with such anotheremphasis!
Say the brave Antony.
The valiant Caesar!
By Isis, I will give thee bloodyteeth
if thou with Caesar paragonagain my man of men.
By your most gracious pardon,madam, I sing but after you.
My salad days when I was greenin judgment,
cold in blood to say as I saidthen!
But, come, away.
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day aseveral greeting,
or I'll unpeople Egypt.
If the great gods be just,
they shall assist the deeds ofjustest men.
Know, worthy Pompey, that whatthey do delay, they not deny.
Whiles we are suitors to theirthrone, decays the thing we suefor.
I shall do well.
The people love me, and the seais mine.
My powers are crescent,
and my auguring hope says itwill come to the full.
Mark Antony in Egypt sits atdinner
and will make no wars withoutdoors.
Caesar gets money where he loseshearts.
Lepidus flatters both, of bothis flattered,
but he neither loves nor eithercares for him.
Caesar and Lepidus are in thefield.
A mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? 'Tis false.
From Silvius, sir.
He dreams.
I know they are in Rome togetherlooking for Antony.
But all the charms of love saltCleopatra,
soften thy waned lip.
Let witchcraft join with beauty,lust with both.
Tie up the libertine in a fieldof feasts.
Keep his brain fuming.
Epicurean cooks sharpen withcloyless sauce his appetite,
that sleep and feeding mayprorogue his honor
even till a lethe'd dullness.
Mark Antony is every hour inRome expected.
Since he went from Egypt, 'tis aspace for further travel.
I did not think this amoroussurfeiter
would have donned his helm forsuch a petty war.
His soldiership is twice theother twain,
but let us rear the higher ouropinion
that our stirring can from thelap of Egypt's widow
pluck the never-lust-weariedAntony.
I cannot hope Caesar and Antonyshall well greet together.
Were it not that we stand upagainst them all,
'twere pregnant they shouldsquare between themselves,
for they have entertained causeenough to draw their swords.
But how the fear of us maycement their division
and bind up the petty differencewe yet not know.
Be it as our gods will have it.
It only stands our lives upon touse our strongest hands.
Good Enobarbus,
'tis a worthy deed and shallbecome you well
to entreat your captain to softand gentle speech.
'Tis not a time for privatestomaching.
Every time serves for the matterthat is then born in it.
But small to greater mattersmust give way.
Not if the small come first.
Your speech is passion,
but, pray you, stir no embersup.
Here comes the noble Antony.
Noble friends,
that which combined us was mostgreat,
and let not a leaner action rendus.
What's amiss, may it be gentlyheard.
When we debate our trivialdifference loud,
we do commit murder in healingwounds.
Then, noble partners,
the rather, for I earnestlybeseech,
touch you the sourest pointswith sweetest terms
nor curstness grow to thematter.
'Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies and tofight, I should do thus.
Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.
Sit.
Sit, sir.
Nay, then.
I learn, you take things illwhich are not so
or being concern you not.
I must be laughed at, if or fornothing or a little,
I should say myself offended,
and with you chiefly in theworld.
My being in Egypt, Caesar, whatwas it to you?
No more than my residing here atRome might be to you in Egypt.
Yet if you there did practice onmy state,
your being in Egypt might be myquestion.
How intend you, practiced?
You may be pleased to catch atmine intent
by what did here befall me.
Your wife and brother made warsupon me,
and their contestation was themefor you.
You were the word of war.
You do mistake your business.
My brother never did urge me inhis act.
Of this my letters before didsatisfy you.
If you'll patch a quarrel,
as matter whole you have not tomake it with,
it must not be with this.
As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit insuch another.
The third of the world is yours,
which with a snaffle you maypace easy
but not such a wife.
So much uncurbable, hergarboils, Caesar,
made out of her impatience,
which not wanted shrewdness ofpolicy too.
I grieving grant did you toomuch disquiet.
For that, you must but say, Icould not help it.
I wrote to you;
when rioting in Alexandria youdid pocket up my letters
with taunts did gibe my missiveout of audience.
Sir, he fell upon me ereadmitted then.
Three kings I had newly feasted
and did want of what I was inthe morning.
But next day I told him ofmyself,
which was as much as to haveasked him pardon.
Let this fellow be nothing ofour strife.
If we contend out of ourquestion, wipe him.
You have broken the article ofyour oath,
which you shall never havetongue to charge me with.
Soft, Caesar.
No, Lepidus, let him speak.
The honor is sacred which hetalks on now,
supposing that I lacked it.
But on, Caesar.
The article of my oath.
To lend me arms and aid when Irequired them,
the which you both denied.
Neglected, rather,
and then when poisoned hours hadbound me up
from mine own knowledge.
As nearly as I may, I'll playthe penitent to you.
But mine honesty shall not makepoor my greatness
nor my power work without it.
Truth is, that Fulvia,
to have me out of Egypt, madewars here,
for which myself, the ignorantmotive,
do so far ask pardon as befitsmine honor
to stoop in such a case.
'Tis noble spoken.
If it might please you,
to enforce no further the griefsbetween ye,
to forget them quite,
and to remember that the presentneed
speaks to atone you.
Worthily spoken.
Or if you borrow one another'slove for the instant,
you may, when you hear no morewords of Pompey,
return it again.
You shall have time to wranglein when you have nothing else todo.
Thou art a soldier only; speakno more.
That truth should be silent Ihad almost forgot.
You wrong this presence,therefore, speak no more.
Go to then your consideratestone.
I do not much dislike the matter
but the manner of his speech.
For it cannot be we shall remainin friendship,
our conditions so differing intheir acts.
Yet if I knew what hoop shouldhold us staunch,
from edge to edge of the world Iwould pursue it.
Give me leave, Caesar.
Speak, Agrippa.
Thou hast a sister by themother's sideó
admired Octavia.
Great Mark Antony is now awidower.
Say not so, Agrippa.
If Cleopatra heard you,
your reproof were well deservedof rashness.
I am not married, Caesar.
Let me hear Agrippa furtherspeak.
To hold you in perpetual amity,to make you brothers,
and to knit your hearts with anunslipping knot,
take Antony Octavia to his wife,
whose beauty claims no worse ahusband than the best of men,
whose virtue and whose generalgraces speak that
which none else can utter.
By this marriage,
all little jealousies, which nowseem great,
and all great fears, which nowimport their dangers,
would then be nothing.
Truths would be tales where nowhalf tales be truths.
Her love to both would,
each to other and all loves toboth, draw after her.
Pardon what I have spoke,
for 'tis a studied,
not a present thought by dutyruminated.
Will Caesar speak?
Not till he hears how Antony istouched with what is spokealready.
What power is in Agrippa?
If I would say, "Agrippa, be itso," to make this good?
The power of Caesar and hispower unto Octavia.
May I never,
to this good purpose that sofairly shows,
dream of impediment!
Let me have your hand furtherthis act of grace
and from this hour the heart ofbrothers govern in our loves
and sway our great designs.
There is my hand.
A sister I bequeath you,
whom no brother did ever love sodearly.
Let her live to join ourkingdoms and our hearts
and never fly off our lovesagain.
Happily, amen!
I did not think to draw my swordagainst Pompey,
for he hath laid strangecourtesies
and great of late upon me.
I must thank him only
lest my remembrance suffer illreport.
At heel of that, defy him.
Time calls upon us.
Of us must Pompey presently besought,
or else he seeks out us.
Where lies he?
About the mount Misenum.
What is his force by land?
Great and increasing,
but by sea, he's an absolutemaster.
So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together.
Haste we for it.
Yet ere we put ourselves inarms,
dispatch we the business we havetalked of.
With most gladness
and do invite you to my sister'sview.
Whither straight I'll lead you.
Let us, Lepidus, not lack yourcompany.
Noble Antony, not sicknessshould detain me.
Welcome from Egypt, sir.
Good Enobarbus!
We have cause to be glad thatmatters are so well digested.
You stayed well by it in Egypt.
Ay, sir; we did sleep day out ofcountenance
and made the night light withdrinking.
Eight wild boars roasted wholeat a breakfast
and but twelve persons there, isthis true?
This was but as a fly by aneagle.
We had much more monstrousmatter of feast,
which worthily deserved thenoting.
She's a most triumphant lady, ifreport be square to her.
When she first met Mark Antony,
she pursed up his heart upon theriver of Cydnus.
There she appeared indeed,
or my reporter devised well forher.
I'll tell you.
The barge she sat in, like aburnished throne,
burned on the water.
The poop was beaten gold.
Purple the sails and so perfumed
that the winds were love-sickwith them.
The oars were silver,
which to the tune of flutes keptstroke,
and made the water, which theybeat to follow faster,
as amorous of their strokes.
For her own person, it beggaredall description.
She did lie in her pavilion,
cloth-of-gold of tissue,
over-picturing that Venus
where we see the fancy outworknature.
On each side her stood prettydimpled boys,
like smiling Cupids withdivers-colored fans,
whose wind did seem to glow thedelicate cheeks
which they did cool and whatthey undid did.
O, rare for Antony.
Her gentlewomen, like theNereides,
so many mermaids, tended her inthe eyes
and made their bends adornings.
At the helm a seeming mermaidsteers.
The silken tackle swell with thetouches
of those flower-soft hands
that yarely frame the office.
From the barge, a strangeinvisible perfume
hits the sense off the adjacentwharfs.
The city cast her people outupon her;
and Antony, enthroned in themarketplace,
did sit alone, whistling to theair,
which, but for vacancy, had goneto gaze on Cleopatra too
and made a gap in nature.
Rare Egyptian!
Upon her landing, Antony sent toher,
invited her to supper.
She replied it should be betterhe became her guest,
which she entreated.
Our courteous Antony,
whom never the word of "no"woman heard speak,
being barbered ten times over,
goes to the feast,
and for his ordinary,
pays his heart for what his eyeseat only.
Royal wench.
She made great Caesar lay hissword to bed.
He plowed her, and she cropped.
I saw her once hop forty paces
through the public street,
and having lost her breath, shespoke and panted
that she did make defectperfection.
And, breathless, power breatheforth.
Now Antony must leave herutterly.
Never; he will not.
Age cannot wither her,
nor custom stale her infinitevariety.
Other women cloy the appetitesthey feed,
but she makes hungry where mostshe satisfies,
for vilest things becomethemselves in her
that the holy priests bless herwhen she is riggish.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty,
can settle the heart of Antony,
Octavia is a blessed lottery tohim.
The world and my great office
will sometimes divide me fromyour bosom.
All which time before the gods
my knee shall bow my prayers tothem for you.
Good night, sir.
My Octavia, read not myblemishes in the world's report.
I have not kept my square,
but that to come shall all bedone by the rule.
Good night, dear lady.
Good night, sir.
Good night.
Now, sirrah, you do wishyourself in Egypt?
Would I had never come fromthence, nor you thither.
If you can, your reason?
I see it in my motion, have itnot in my tongue,
but yet hie you to Egypt again.
Say to me,
whose fortunes shall risehigher, Caesar's or mine?
Caesar's.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not byhis side.
Thy demon that's thy spiritwhich keeps thee
is noble, courageous, high,unmatchable,
where Caesar's is not.
But near him, thy angel becomesa fear as being overpowered.
Therefore, make space enoughbetween you.
Speak this no more.
If thou dost play with him atany game, thou art sure to lose.
And of that natural luck, hebeats thee against the odds.
Thy luster thickens when heshines by.
I say again, thy spirit is allafraid to govern thee near him,
but he away, 'tis noble.
Get thee gone.
Say to Ventidius I would speakwith him.
He shall to Parthia.
Be it art or hap, he hath spokentrue.
The very dice obey him.
And in our sports, my bettercunning faints under his chance.
If we draw lots, he speeds.
His cocks do win the battlestill of mine
when it is all to naught,
and his quails ever beat mine,inhooped, at odds.
I will to Egypt.
And though I make this marriagefor my peace,
in the east my pleasure lies.
O, come, Ventidius; you must toParthia.
Your commission's ready. Followme and receive it.
Give me some music.
Music, moody food of us thattrade in love.
Let it alone.
Let's to billiards. Come,Charmian.
My arm is sore; best play withMardian.
As well a woman with an eunuchplayed as with a woman.
Come, you'll play with me, sir?
As well as I can, madam.
And when goodwill is showed,though it come too short,
the actor may plead pardon.
I'll none now.
Give me mine angle.
We'll to the river.
There, my music playing far off,
I will betray tawny-finnedfishes.
My bended hook shall piercetheir slimy jaws.
And as I draw them up,
I'll think them every one anAntony
and say, "Ah, ha! You'recaught."
'Twas merry when you wagered onyour angling.
When your diver did hang asalt-fish on his hook,
which he with fervency drew up.
That timeóO times!
I laughed him out of patience.
And that night, I laughed himinto patience.
And next morn, ere the ninthhour,
I drunk him to his bed,
then put my tires and mantles onhim,
whilst I wore his swordPhilippan.
O, from Italy.
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings inmine ears
that long time have been barren.
Madam, madamó
Antony is dead.
If thou say so, villain, I'llkill'st thy mistress.
But well and free, if thou soyield him, there is gold.
And here my bluest veins tokiss,
a hand that kings have lippedand trembled kissing.
First, madam, he is well.
Why, there's more gold.
But, sirrah, mark, we use to saythe dead are well.
Bring it to that, the gold Igive thee will I melt
and pour down thy ill-utteringthroat.
Good madam, hear me.
Well, go to, I will.
but there's no goodness in thyface.
If Antony be free and healthful,
why so tart a favor to trumpetsuch good tidings?
If not well, thou shouldst comelike a fury crowned with snakes,
not like a formal man.
Will it please you hear me?
I have a mind to strike thee erethou speak'st.
Yet if thou say Antony lives, iswell,
or friends with Caesar, or notcaptive to him,
I'll set thee in a shower ofgold
and hail rich pearls upon thee.
Madam, he's well.
Well said.
And friends with Caesar.
Thou art an honest man.
Caesar and he are greaterfriends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.
But yet, madamó
I do not like "but yet."
It does allay the goodprecedence.
Fie upon "but yet."
"But yet" is as a jailer tobring forth some monstrousmalefactor.
Prithee, friend, pour out thepack of matter to mine ear.
The good and bad together: he'sfriends with Caesar,
in state of health thou say'st,
and thou say'st free.
Free, madam, no; I make no suchreport.
He's bound unto Octavia.
For what good turn?
For the best turn in the bed.
I am pale, Charmian.
Madam, he's married to Octavia.
The most infectious pestilenceupon thee!
Good madam, patience.
What say you?
Hence, horrible villain,
or I'll spurn thine eyes likeballs before me.
I'll unhair thy head.
Thou shalt be whipped with wire,stewed in brine,
smarting in lingering pickle.
Gracious madam, I that do bringthe news made not the match.
Say 'tis not so, a province Iwill give thee
and make thy fortunes proud.
The blow thou hadst shall makethy peace for moving me to rage.
And I will boot thee with whatgift beside thy modesty can beg.
He's married, madam.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Nay, then I'll run.
What mean you, madam? I havemade no fault.
Good madam, keep yourself withinyourself. The man is innocent.
Some innocents 'scape not thethunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile,
and kindly creatures turn all toserpents!
Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bitehimócall!
He is afeard to come.
I will not hurt him!
These hands do lack nobility
that they strike a meaner thanmyself
since I myself have given myselfthe cause.
Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is nevergood to bring bad news.
Give to a gracious message anhost of tongues,
but let ill tidings tellthemselves when they be felt.
I have done my duty.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than Ido if thou again say "yes."
He's married, madam.
The gods confound thee!
Dost thou hold there still?
Should I lie, madam?
O, I would thou didst,
so half my Egypt were submerged
and made a cistern for scaledsnakes!
Go, get thee hence.
Hadst thou Narcissus in thyface,
to me, thou wouldst appear mostugly.
He is married?
I crave your highness' pardon.
Take no offense that I would notoffend you.
To punish me for what you makeme do seems much unequal.
He is married to Octavia.
O, that his fault should make aknave of thee
that art not what thou art sureof.
Get thee hence.
The merchandise that thou hastbrought from Rome
are all too dear for me.
Lie they upon my hand and beundone by 'em.
Good Your Highness, patience.
In praising Antony, I havedispraised Caesar.
Many times, madam.
I am paid for it now.
Lead me from hence. I faint.
O Iras!
Charmian!
'Tis no matter.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas.
Bid him report the feature ofOctaviaó
her years, her inclination.
Let him not leave out the colorof her hair.
Bring me word quickly.
Let him forever go.
Let him not.
Charmian, though he be paintedone way like a Gorgon,
the other way's a Mars.
Bid you, Alexas, bring me wordhow tall she is.
Pity me, Charmian,
but do not speak to me.
To you all three,
the senators alone of this greatworld,
chief factors for the gods,
I do not know wherefore myfather should revengers want,
having a son and friends,
since Julius Caesar,
who at Philippi the good Brutusghosted,
there saw you laboring for him.
What was it that moved paleCassius to conspire?
And what made the all-honored,honest Roman Brutus,
with the armed rest, courtiersof beauteous freedom,
to drench the capitol?
But that they would have one manbut a man?
And that is it hath made me rigmy navy
at whose burden the angeredocean foams,
with which I meant to scourgethe ingratitude
that despiteful Rome cast on mynoble father.
Take your time.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey,with thy sails.
We'll speak with thee at sea.
At land, thou know'st how muchwe do overcount thee.
At land, indeed,
thou dost overcount me of myfather's house.
But since the cuckoo builds notfor himself,
remain in it as thou mayst.
Be pleased to tell usó
for this is from the presentó
how you take the offers we havesent you.
There's the point.
Which do not be entreated to,
but weigh what it is worthembraced.
And what may follow, to try alarger fortune.
You have made me offer ofSicily, Sardinia,
and I must rid all the sea ofpirates,
then to send measures of wheatto Rome.
This agreed upon to part withunhacked edges
and bear back our targesundinted.
That's our offer.
Know, then, I came before youhere
a man prepared to take thisoffer,
but Mark Antony put me to someimpatience.
Though I lose the praise of itby telling, you must know,
when Caesar and your brotherwere at blows,
your mother came to Sicily anddid find her welcome friendly.
I have heard it, Pompey,
and am well studied for aliberal thanks,
which I do owe you.
Let me have your hand.
I did not think, sir, to havemet you here.
The beds in the east are soft,
and thanks to you that called metimelier than my purpose hither,
for I have gained by it.
Since I saw you last, there is achange upon you.
Well, I know not what counts
harsh fortune casts upon myface,
but in my bosom shall she nevercome
to make my heart her vassal.
Well met here.
I hope so, Lepidus.
Thus we are agreed.
I crave our composition may bewritten and sealed between us.
That's the next to do.
We'll feast each other ere wepart.
And let's draw lots who shallbegin.
That will I, Pompey.
No, Antony, take the lot.
But, first or last,
your fine Egyptian cookery shallhave the fame.
I have heard Julius Caesar grewfat with feasting there.
You have heard much.
I have fair meanings, sir.
And fair words to them.
Then so much have I heard.
And I have heard, Apollodoruscarriedó
No more of that: he did so.
What, I pray you?
A certain queen to Caesar in amattress.
I know thee now; how farestthou, soldier?
Well, and well am like to do,
for I perceive four feasts aretoward.
Let me shake thy hand.
I've never hated thee.
I have seen thee fight, when Ihave envied thy behavior.
Sir, I never loved you much, butI have praised you
when you have well deserved tentimes as much as I have said youdid.
Enjoy thy plainness.
It nothing ill becomes thee.
Will you lead, lords?
You and I have known, sir.
At sea, I think.
We have, sir.
You have done well by water.
And you by land.
I will praise any man that willpraise me,
though it cannot be denied whatI have done by land.
Nor what I have done by water.
Yes, something you can deny foryour own safety.
You have been a great thief bysea.
And you by land.
There I deny my land service.
But give me your hand, Menas.
If our eyes had authority,
here they might take two thieveskissing.
All men's faces are truewhatsome'er their hands are.
But there is never a fair womanhas a true face.
No slander; they steal hearts.
We came hither to fight withyou.
For my part, I am sorry it isturned to a drinking.
Pompey doth this day laugh awayhis fortune.
If he do, sure, he cannot weepit back again.
You've said, sir.
We looked not for Mark Antonyhere.
Pray you, is he married toCleopatra?
Caesar's sister is calledOctavia.
True, sir; she was the wife ofCaius Marcellus.
But she is now the wife ofMarcus Antonius.
Pray ye, sir?
'Tis true.
Then is Caesar and he foreverknit together.
If I were bound to divine ofthis unity,
I would not prophesy so.
I think the policy of thatpurpose made more in themarriage
than the love of the parties.
I think so too.
But you shall find the band thatseems to tie their friendshiptogether
will be the very strangler oftheir amity.
Octavia is of a holy, cold, andstill conversation.
Who would not have his wife so?
Not he that himself is not so,which is Mark Antony.
He will to his Egyptian dishagain.
Then shall the sighs of Octaviablow the fire up in Caesar.
And as I said before,
that which is the strength oftheir amity
shall prove the immediate authorof their variance.
Antony will use his affectionwhere it is.
He married but his occasionhere.
And thus it may be.
Thus do they, sir.
They take the flow of the Nile
by certain scales in thepyramid.
They know by the height, thelowness, or the mean
if dearth or foison follow.
The higher Nilus swells, themore it promises.
As it ebbs, the seedsman, uponthe slime and ooze,
scatters his grain and shortlycomes to harvest.
You have strange serpents there.
Ay, Lepidus.
Your serpent of Egypt is brednow of your mud
by the operation of your sun.
So is your crocodile.
A health to Lepidus!
I am not so well as I should be,
but I'll ne'er out.
Not till you have slept;
I fear me you'll be in tillthen.
Nay, certainly, I have heard
the Ptolemies' pyramises arevery goodly things.
Without contradiction, I haveheard that.
Pompey, a word.
Say in mine ear; what is it?
Forsake thy seat, I do beseechthee, Captain, and hear me speaka word.
Forbear me till anon.
This wine for Lepidus!
What manner of thing is yourcrocodile?
It is shaped, sir, like itself.
And it is as broad as it hathbreadth.
It is just so high as it is
and moves with its own organs.
It lives by that whichnourisheth it,
and the elements, once out ofit,
it transmigrates.
What color is it of?
Of its own color too.
'Tis a strange serpent.
'Tis so, and the tears of it arewet.
Will this description satisfyhim?
With the health that Pompeygives him, else he is a veryepicure.
Go hang, sir, hang!
Tell me of that? Away!
Do as I bid you.
Where's this cup I called for?
If for the sake of merit thouwilt hear me,
rise from thy stool.
I think thou art mad.
These quicksands, Lepidus, keepoff them, for you sink.
The matter?
I have ever held my cap off tothy fortunes.
Thou hast served me with muchfaith.
What else to say?
Be jolly, lords.
Wilt thou be lord of all theworld?
What sayest thou?
Wilt thou be lord of the wholeworld that's twice?
How should that be?
But entertain it, and thoughthou think me poor,
I am the man will give thee allthe world.
Hast thou drunk well?
Now, Pompey, I have kept me fromthe cup.
Thou art, if thou darest be, theearthly Jove.
Whatever the ocean pales or skyinclips is thine if thou wilthave it.
Show me which way.
These three world-sharers, thesecompetitors are in thy vessel.
Let me cut the cable and, whenwe are put off,
fall to their throatsó all thereis thine.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done
and not have spoke on it!
In me, 'tis villainy; in thee,it had been good service.
Thou must know 'tis not myprofit that doth lead minehonor.
Mine honor, it.
Repent that e'er thy tongue hathso betrayed thine act.
Being done unknown,
I should afterwards have foundit well done
but must condemn it now.
Desist and drink.
For this, I'll never follow thypalled fortunes more.
Who seeks and will not take whenonce 'tis offered
shall never find it more.
This health for Lepidus!
Bear him ashore.
I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.
Here's to thee, Menas!
Enobarbus, welcome!
Fill till the cup be hid.
There's a strong fellow, Menas.
Why?
A' bears the third part of theworld in arms, man;
see'st not?
The third part then is drunk.
Would it were all that it mightgo on wheels.
Drink thou; increase the reels.
Come.
This is not yet an Alexandrianfeast.
It ripens towards it.
Strike the vessels, ho?
Here's to Caesar!
I could well forbear it.
It's monstrous labor when I washmy brain
and it grows fouler.
Be a child of the time.
Possess it, I'll make answer.
But I'd rather fast from allfour days
than drink so much in one.
Ha, my brave emperor!
Shall we dance now the Egyptianbacchanals
and celebrate our drink?
Let's have it, good soldier.
Come, let's all take hands
till that the conquering winehath steeped our sense
in soft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands.
Make battery to our ears withthe loud music.
What would you more?
Pompey, good night.
Good brother, let me request youoff.
Our graver business frowns atthis levity.
Gentle lords, let's part.
You see we have burnt ourcheeks.
Strong Enobarb is weaker thanthe wine.
And mine own tongue splits whatit speaks.
The wild disguise hath almostanticked us all.
What needs more words?
Good night.
Good Antony, your hand.
I'll try you on the shore.
And shall, sir; give us yourhand.
O Antony, you have my father'shouse.
But, what? We are friends.
Come, down into the boats.
Take heed you fall not.
Menas!
I'll not on shore.
No, to my cabin.
These drums, these trumpets,flutes!
What!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loudfarewell
to these great fellows.
You take from me a great part ofmyself.
Use me well in it.
Sister, prove such a wife as mythoughts make thee
and as my uarthest band shallpass on thy approof.
Most noble Antony, let not thepiece of virtue,
which is set betwixt us as thecement of our love,
to keep it builded, be the ramto batter the fortress of it.
For better might we have lovedwithout this mean
if on both parts this be notcherished.
Make me not offended in yourdistrust.
I have said.
You shall not find, though yoube therein curious,
the least cause for what youseem to fear.
So the gods keep you
and make the hearts of Romansserve your ends.
We will here part.
Farewell, my dearest sister.
Fare thee well.
The elements be kind to thee
and make thy spirits all ofcomfort.
Fare thee well.
My noble brother.
The April's in her eyes.
It is love's spring, and thesethe showers to bring it on.
Be cheerful.
Sir, look well to my husband'shouse and
What, Octavia?
I'll tell you in your ear.
Her tongue will not obey herheart,
nor can her heart inform hertongue.
The swan's down-feather thatstands upon the swell
at full of tide and neither wayinclines.
Will Caesar weep?
Why, Enobarbus,
when Antony found Julius Caesardead,
he cried almost to roaring,
and he wept when at Philippi hefound Brutus slain.
That year, indeed, he wastroubled with a rheum.
Oh, sweet Octavia, you shallhear from me still.
The time shall not outgo mythinking on you.
Come, sir, come.
I'll wrestle with you in mystrength of love.
Look, here I have you.
Thus, I let you go and give youto the gods.
Adieu; be happy.
Let all the number of the starsgive light to thy fair way.
Farewell. Farewell.
Farewell.
Where is the fellow?
Half afeard to come.
Go to, go to.
Come hither, sir.
Come thou near.
Most gracious majestyó
Didst thou behold Octavia?
Ay, dread queen.
Where?
Madam, in Rome.
I looked her in the face
and saw her led between herbrother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as me?
She is not, madam.
Didst hear her speak?
Is she shrill-tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak; she islow-voiced.
That's not so good.
He cannot like her long.
Like her! O Isis, 'tisimpossible.
I think so, Charmianó dull oftongue and dwarfish!
What majesty is in her gait?
Remember, if ever thou look'dston majesty.
She creeps.
Her motion and her station areas one.
She shows a body rather than alife,
a statue than a breather.
Is this certain?
Or I have no observance.
Three in Egypt cannot makebetter note.
He's very knowing, I do perceiveit.
There's nothing in her yet.
The fellow has good judgment.
Excellent.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
Madam, she was a widow.
Widow! Charmian, hark.
And I do think she's thirty.
Bear'st thou her face in mind?
Is it long or round?
Round, even to faultiness.
For the most part, too, they arefoolish that are so.
Her hair, what color?
Brown, madam,
and her forehead as low as shewould wish it.
There's gold for thee.
Thou must not take my formersharpness ill.
I will employ thee back again.
I find thee most fit forbusiness.
Go, make thee ready.
Our letters are prepared.
A proper man.
Indeed, he is so.
I repent me much that so Iharried him.
Why, methinks, by him, thiscreature's no such thing.
Nothing, madam.
The man hath seen some majestyand should know.
Hath he seen majesty?
Isis else defend and serving youso long.
I have one thing more to ask himyet, good Charmian.
But 'tis no matter.
Thou shalt bring him to me whereI will write.
All may be well enough.
Nay, nay, Octavia, not onlythat.
That were excusable,
that and thousands more offsemblable import.
But he hath waged new warsagainst Pompeyó
made his will and read it topublic ear,
spoke scantly of me
when perforce he could not butpay me terms of honor.
My good lord, believe not all,
or if you must believe, stomachnot all.
A more unhappy lady, if thisdivision chance,
never stood between praying forboth parts.
The good gods will mock mepresently
when I shall pray, "O, bless mylord and husband!"
Undo that prayerby crying out asloud,
"O, bless my brother!"
Husband, win; win, brother.
Prays, and destroys the prayer.
No midway twixt these extremesat all.
Gentle Octavia.
Let your best love draw to thatpoint
which seeks best to preserve it.
If I lose mine honor, I losemyself.
Better I were not yours thanyours so branchless.
But, as you requested, yourselfshall go between us.
The meantime, lady,
I'll raise the preparation of awar shall stain your brother.
Make your soonest haste so yourdesires are yours.
Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me mostweak, most weak.
Your reconciler.
Wars twixt you twain would be asif the world should cleave
and that slain men should solderup the rift.
When it appears to you wherethis begins,
turn your displeasure that way,
for our faults can never be soequal
that your love can equally movewith them.
Provide your going, choose yourown company,
and command what cost your hearthas mind to.
How now, friend Eros.
There's strange news come, sir.
What, man?
Caesar and Lepidus have madewars upon Pompey.
This is old; what is thesuccess?
Caesar, having made use of himin the wars against Pompey,
presently denied him rivality,
would not let him partake in theglory of the action,
and, not resting here,
accuses him of letters he hadformerly wrote to Pompey.
Upon his own appeal, seizes him.
So the poor third is up tilldeath enlarge his confine.
Then, world, thou hast a pair ofchaps, no more.
Contemning Rome,
he has done all this and more inAlexandria.
Here's the manner of it.
In the marketplace, on atribunal silvered,
Cleopatra and himself in chairsof gold
were publicly enthroned.
At the feet sat Caesarion, whomthey call my father's son
and all the unlawful issue
that their lust since then hathmade between them.
Unto her he gave thestablishment of Egypt,
made her of lower Syria, Cyprus,Lydia, absolute queen.
This in the public eye?
In the common showplace wherethey exercise.
His sons he there proclaimed thekings of kings.
Great Media, Parthia, andArmenia, he gave to Alexander.
To Ptolemy, he assigned Syria,Cilicia, Phoenicia.
She in the habiliments of thegoddess Isis that day appeared
and oft before gave audience as'tis reported so.
Let Rome be thus informed.
Who, queasy with his insolencealready, will their goodthoughts call from him.
The people knows it.
They have now received hisaccusations.
Who does he accuse?
Caesaróand that having in SicilySextus Pompeius spoiled,
we had not rated him his part ofthe isle.
Then does he say he lent me someshipping unrestored.
Lastly, he frets that Lepidus
of the triumvirate should bedeposed
and being that we detain all hisrevenue.
Sir, this should be answered.
'Tis done already, and themessenger gone.
I have told him, Lepidus wasgrown too cruel,
that he his high authorityabused,
and did deserve his change,
for what I have conquered, Igrant him part.
But then in his Armenia andother of his conquered kingdoms,
I demand the like.
He'll never yield to that.
Nor must not then be yielded toin this.
Hail, Caesar, and my lords!
Hail, most dear Caesar!
That ever I should call theecastaway.
You have not called me so, norhave you cause.
Why have you stolen upon usthus?
You come not like Caesar'ssister.
The wife of Antony should havean army for an usher,
and the neighs of horse to tellof her approach
long ere she did appear.
The trees by the way should haveborne men
and expectation fainted, longingfor what it had not.
Nay, the dust should haveascended to the roof of heaven,
raised by your populous troops,
but you are come a market maidto Rome
and have prevented theostentation of our love,
which left unshown is often leftunloved.
We should have met you by seaand land,
supplying every stage with anaugmented greeting.
Good my lord, to come thus was Inot constrained
but did it on my free will.
My lord, Mark Antony,
hearing that you prepared forwar,
acquainted my grieved earwithal,
whereon, I begged his pardon forreturn.
Which soon he granted,
being an obstruct 'tween hislust and him.
Do not say so, my lord.
I have eyes upon him,
and his affairs come to me onthe wind.
Where is he now?
My lord, in Athens.
No, my most wronged sister.
Cleopatra hath nodded him toher.
He hath given his empire up to awhore,
who now are levying the kings ofthe earth for war.
Ay me, most wretched,
that have my heart partedbetwixt two friends
that does afflict each other.
Cheer your heart.
Be you not troubled with thetime
which drives over your contentthese strong necessities.
But let determined things todestiny hold unbewailed theirway.
Welcome to Rome.
Nothing more dear to me.
You are abused beyond the markof thought
and the high gods to do youjustice,
make them ministers of us andthose that love you.
Best of comfort and ever welcometo us.
Welcome, lady.
Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love andpity you.
Only the adulterous Antony, mostlarge in his abominations,
turns you off and gives hispotent regiment to a trull
that noises it against us.
Is it so, sir?
Most certain.
Sister, welcome.
Pray you be ever known topatience.
My dearest sister.
I will be even with thee, doubtit not.
But why, why, why?
Thou hast forspoke my being inthese wars
and say'st it is not fit.
Well, is it? Is it?
If not denounced against us,
why should not we be there inperson?
Well, I could reply,
if we should serve with horseand mares together,
the horse were merely lost.
What is't you say?
Your presence needs must puzzleAntonyó
take from his heart, take fromhis brain,
from's time that should not thenbe spared.
He is already traduced forlevity.
And 'tis said in Rome thatPhotinus, an eunuch,
and your maids manage this war.
Sink Rome, and their tongues rotthat speak against us.
A charge we bear in the war
and, as the president of mykingdom, will appear there for aman.
Speak not against it; I will notstay behind.
Is it not strange, Canidius,
that from Tarentum andBrundusium
he could so quickly cut theIonian Sea
and take in Toryne?
You've heard on it, sweet?
Celerity is never more admiredthan by the negligent.
A good rebuke,
which might have well becomedthe best of men
to taunt at slackness.
Canidius, we will fight with himby sea.
By sea! What else?
Why will my lord do so?
For that he dares us to it.
Your ships are not well manned.
Your mariners are muleters,reapers,
people engrossed by swiftimpress.
In Caesar's fleet are those thatoften have against Pompeyfought.
Their ships are yare; yours,heavy.
No disgrace will fall you forrefusing him at sea,
being prepared for land.
By sea, by sea.
Most worthy sir, you thereinthrow away
the absolute soldiership youhave by land.
I'll fight at sea!
I have sixty sails; Caesar, nonebetter.
Our overplus of shipping will weburn
and with the rest full-mannedfrom the head of Actium
beat the approaching Caesar.
But if we fail, we then can doit at land.
How now, soldier?
O noble emperor, do not fight bysea.
Trust not to rotten planks.
Do you misdoubt this sword,these my wounds?
Let the Egyptians andPhoenicians go a-ducking.
We are used to conquer,
standing on the earth, fightingfoot-to-foot.
Well, well, away!
Set we our squadrons on yondside of the hill
in eye of Caesar's battle
from which place we may thenumber of the ships behold
and so proceed accordingly.
Strike not by land; keep whole.
Provoke not battle till we havedone at sea.
Do not exceed the prescript ofthis scroll.
Our fortune lies upon this jump.
Hark! The land bids me tread nomore upon it.
It is ashamed to bear me!
Friends, come hither.
I am so lated in the world thatI have lost my way forever.
I have a ship laden with gold.
Take that, divide it;
fly, and make your peace withCaesar.
Fly? Not we.
I have fled myself
and have instructed cowards torun and show their shoulders.
Friends, begone.
I have myself resolved upon acourse
which has no need of you.
Begone.
My treasure's in the harbor.Take it.
O, I followed that I blush tolook upon.
Leave me, I pray, a little.
Pray you, now.
Nay, do so, for indeed I havelost command.
Therefore, I pray you, I'll seeyou by and by.
Nay, gentle madam, to him,comfort him.
Do, most dear queen.
Do! Why, what else?
No, no, no, no, no.
The queen, my lord, the queen.
Go to him, madam. Speak withhim.
He is unqualitied with veryshame.
Well then, sustain me, O!
Most noble sir, arise; the queenapproaches.
Her head's declined and deathwill seize her,
but your comfort makes therescue.
I have offended reputation, amost unnoble swerving.
Sir, the queen.
O whither hast thou led me,Egypt?
See how I convey my shame out ofthine eyes
by looking back what I have leftbehind,
destroyed in dishonor.
O my lord, my lord,
forgive my fearful sails!
I little thought you would havefollowed.
Egypt, thou knew'st too well
my heart was to thy rudder tiedby the strings
and thou shouldst tow me after.
O'er my spirit thy fullsupremacy thou knew'st
and that thy beck might
from the bidding of the godscommand me.
O, my pardon.
Now I must to the young man sendhumble treaties,
dodge and palter in the shiftsof lowness,
who with half the bulk of theworld
played as I pleased, making andmarring fortunes.
You did know how much you weremy conqueror
and that my sword, made weak bymy affection,
would obey it on all cause.
Pardon, pardon.
Fall not a tear, I say;
one of them rates all that iswon and lost.
Give me a kiss.
Even this repays me.
We sent our schoolmaster; is hecome back?
Love, I am full of lead.
Some wine within there and ourviands!
Fortune knows we scorn her mostwhen most she offers blows.
Let him appear that's come fromAntony.
Know you him?
Caesar, 'tis his schoolmasteró
an argument that he is plucked
when hither he sends so poor apinion of his wing
which had superfluous kings formessengers
not many moons gone by.
Approach and speak.
Such as I am, I come fromAntony.
I was of late as petty to hisends as is the morn-dew
on the myrtle leaf to his grandsea.
Be it so; declare thine office.
Lord of his fortunes, he salutesthee
and requires to live in Egypt,
which not granted, he lessenshis requests;
and to thee sues to let himbreathe
between the heavens and earth, aprivate man in Athensó
this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thygreatness,
submits her to thy might,
and of thee, craves the circleof the Ptolemies for her heirs,
now hazarded to thy grace.
For Antony,
I have no ears to his request.
The queen of audience nor desireshall fail,
so she from Egypt drive herall-disgraced friend,
or take his life there.
This if she perform, she shallnot sue unheard.
So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee!
Bring him through the bands.
To try thy eloquence now 'tistime; dispatch.
From Antony win Cleopatra;promise.
And in our name, what sherequires.
Add more from thine invention,offers.
Women are not in their bestfortunes strong,
but want will perjure thenever-touched vestal.
Try thy cunning, Thyreus.
Make thine own edict for thypains,
which we will answer as a law.
Caesar, I go.
Observe how Antony becomes hisflaw,
and what thou think'st his veryaction speaks
in every power that moves.
Caesar, I shall.
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think and die.
Is Antony or we in fault inthis?
Antony only, that would make hiswill lord of his reason.
What though you fled from thatgreat face of war,
whose several ranges frightedeach other,
why should he follow?
The itch of his affection
should not then have nicked hiscaptainship
at such a point when half tohalf the world opposed,
he being the meered question.
'Twas a shame no less than washis loss,
to course your flying flags andleave his navy gazing.
Prithee, peace.
Is that his answer?
Aye, my lord.
The queen shall then havecourtesy,
so she shall yield us up.
He says so.
Well, let her know it.
To the boy, Caesar send thisgrizzled head,
and he will fill thy wishes tothe brim with principalities.
That head, my lord?
To him again;
tell him he wears the rose ofyouth upon him
from which the world should notesomething particular.
His coin, ships, legions may bea coward's,
whose ministers would prevailunder the service of a child
as soon as in the command ofCaesar.
I dare him, therefore, to layhis gay comparisons apart
and answer me declined, swordagainst swordó
ourselves alone.
I'll write it; follow me.
Yes, like enough,
high-battled Caesar will unstatehis happiness
and be staged to the showagainst a sworder.
I see men's judgments are aparcel of their fortunes.
And things outward do draw theinward quality after them
to suffer all alike that heshould dream,
knowing all measures
the full Caesar will answer hisemptiness.
Caesar, thou hast subdued his isjudgment too.
A messenger from Caesar.
What, no more ceremony?
See, my women.
Against the blown rose may theystop their nose
that kneeled unto the buds.
Admit him, sir.
Mine honesty and I begin tosquare.
The loyalty well held to foolsdoes make our faith mere folly.
Yet he that can endure to followwith allegiance a fallen lord
does conquer him that did hismaster conquer
and earns a place in the story.
Caesar's will?
Hear it apart.
None but friends; say boldly.
So haply are they friends toAntony.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesarhas or needs not us.
If Caesar please, our masterwill leap to be his friend,
for us, you know, whose he is weare,
and that is Caesar's.
So.
Thus then, thou most renowned,
Caesar entreats not to considerin what case thou stand'st
further than he is Caesar.
Go on, right royal.
He knows that you embrace notAntony as you did love
but as you feared him.
O!
The scars upon your honor,therefore, he does pity
as constrained blemishes, not asdeserved.
He is a god and knows what ismost right.
Mine honor was not yielded butconquered merely.
To be sure of that, I will askAntony.
Sir, sir, thou art so leaky thatwe must leave thee to thysinking,
for thy dearest quit thee.
Shall I say to Caesar what yourequire of him?
For he partly begs to be desiredto give.
It much would please him that ofhis fortunes
you should make a staff to leanupon.
But it would warm his spirits
to hear from me that you hadleft Antony
and put yourself under hisshroud,
the universal landlord.
What's your name?
My name is Thyreus.
Most kind messenger, say togreat Caesar this:
in deputation, I kiss hisconquering hand.
Tell him, I am prompt to lay mycrown at his feet
and there to kneel.
Tell him from his all-obeyingbreath, I hear the doom ofEgypt.
'Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combatingtogether.
If that the former dare but whatit can,
no chance may shake it.
Give me grace to lay my duty onyour hand.
Your Caesar's father oft,
when he hath mused of takingkingdoms in,
bestowed his lips on thatunworthy place as it rainedkisses.
Favors, by Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?
One that but performs thebidding of the fullest man
and worthiest to have commandobeyed.
You will be whipped.
Approach there.
Ah, you kite!
Now gods and devils!
Authority melts from me.
Of late when I cried "ho" likeboys unto a muss,
kings would start forth and cry,"Your will?"
Have you no ears? I am Antonyyet!
Take hence this Jack and whiphim.
'Tis better playing with alion's whelp
than with an old one dying.
Moon and stars! Whip him.
Were it twenty of the greatesttributaries that do acknowledgeCaesar,
should I find them so saucy withthe hand of she here.
What's her name? Since she wasCleopatra?
Whip him, fellows, till like aboy
you see him cringe his face andwhine aloud for mercy.
Take him hence.
Mark Antony!
Tug him awayóbeing whipped,bring him again.
This Jack of Caesar's shall bearus an errand to him.
You were half blasted ere I knewyou.
Ha! Have I my pillow leftunpressed in Rome
forborne the getting of a lawfulrace
and by a gem of women
to be abused by one that lookson feeders?
Good my lordó
You have been a boggler ever.
But when we in our viciousnessgrow hardó
O misery on it then the wisegods seel our eyes,
in our own filth, drop our clearjudgments,
make us adore our errors,
laugh at us while we strut toour confusion.
O, is it come to this?
I found you as a morsel coldupon dead Caesar's trencher.
Nay, you were a fragment ofCneius Pompey's.
Besides what hotter hours,unregistered in vulgar fame,
you have luxuriously picked out.
For I am sure, though,
you can guess what temperanceshould be,
you know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a fellow that will takerewards
and say "God quit you!"
be familiar with my playfellow,your handó
this kingly seal and plighter ofhigh hearts!
O, that I were upon the hill ofBasan,
to outroar the horned herd,
for I have savage cause.
And to proclaim it civilly werelike a haltered neck
which does the hangman thank forbeing yare about him.
Is he whipped?
Soundly, my lord.
Cried he and begged a pardon?
He did ask a favor.
If that thy father live,
let him repent thou wast notmade his daughter,
and be thou sorry to followCaesar in his triumph
since thou hast been whipped forfollowing him.
Henceforth, the white hand of alady fever thee,
shake thou to look on it.
Get thee back to Caesar; tellhim thy entertainment.
Look, thou say he makes me angrywith him
for he seems proud anddisdainful,
harping on what I am, not whathe knew I was.
He makes me angry!
And at this time most easy 'tisto do it
when my good stars that were myformer guides
have empty left their orbs
and shot their fires into theabysm of hell.
If he mislike my speech and whatis done,
tell him he has Hipparchus, myenfranched bondman,
whom he may at pleasure whip, orhang, or torture
as he shall like to quit me.
Urge it thou. Hence, with thystripes, begone.
Have you done yet?
Alack, our terrene moon is noweclipsed.
And it portends alone the fallof Antony.
I must stay his time.
To flatter Caesar would youmingle eyes
with one that ties his points?
Not know me yet?
Coldhearted toward me?
Ah, dear, if I be so,
from my cold heart let heavenengender hail,
and poison it in the source,
and the first stone drop in myneck
as it determines so dissolve mylife.
The next Caesarion smite,
till by degrees the memory of mywomb,
together with my brave Egyptiansall,
by the discandying of thispelleted storm,
lie graveless
till the flies and gnats of Nilehave buried them for prey.
I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria,where I will oppose his fate.
Our force by land hath noblyheld.
Our navy, too, have knit again,
and fleet threatening mostsea-like.
Where hast thou been, my heart?
Dost thou hear, lady?
If from the field I shall returnonce more to kiss these lips,
I will appear in blood.
I and my sword will earn ourchronicle.
There's hope in it yet.
That's my brave lord.
I will be treble-sinewed,hearted, breathed,
and fight maliciously.
For when mine hours were niceand lucky,
men did ransom lives of me forjests.
But now I'll set my teeth
and send to darkness all thatstop me.
Come, let's have one other gaudynight.
Call to me all my sad captains.
Fill our bowls once more.
Let's mock the midnight bell
It is my birthday.
I had thought to have held itpoor,
but since my lord is Antonyagain,
I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
Call all his noble captains tomy lord.
Do so; we'll speak to them.
And tonight I'll force the winepeep through their scars.
Come, my queen, there's sap init yet.
The next time I do fight I'llmake death love me,
for I will contend even with hispestilent scythe.
Now he'll outstare thelightning.
To be furious is to be frightedout of fear.
And in that mood, the dove willpeck the estridge.
And I see still a diminution
in our captain's brain restoreshis heart.
When valor preys on reason,
it eats the sword it fightswith.
I will seek some way to leavehim.
He calls me boy
and chides as he had power tobeat me out of Egypt.
My messenger he hath whippedwith rods,
dares me to personal combat,Caesar to Antony.
Let the old ruffian know I havemany other ways to die,
meantime laugh at his challenge.
Caesar must think,
when one so great begins torage,
he's hunted even to falling.
Give him no breath but now makeboot of his distraction.
Never anger made good guard foritself.
Let our best heads know thattomorrow
the last of many battles we meanto fight.
Within our files there are ofthose
that served Mark Antony butlateó
enough to fetch him in.
See it done.
And feast the army.
We have store to do it, and theyhave earned the waste.
Poor Antony.
He will not fight with me,Domitius.
No.
And why should he not?
He thinks being 20 times ofbetter fortune,
he is 20 men to 1.
Tomorrow, soldier, by sea andland I'll fight,
or I will live or bathe my dyinghonor
in the blood shall make it liveagain.
Will thou fight well?
I'll strike and cry, "Take all."
Well said; come on.
Call forth my householdservants.
Let's tonight be bounteous atour meal.
Oh, give me thy hand.
Thou hast been rightly honest.
So hast thou.
Thou and thou and thou.
You have served me well,
and kings have been yourfellows.
What means this?
'Tis one of those odd tricks
which sorrow shoots out of themind.
And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so manymen,
and all of you clapped uptogether in an Antony
that I might do you service sogood as you have done.
The gods forbid.
Well..
Well, my good fellows, wait onme tonight.
Scant not my cups and make asmuch of me
as when mine empire was yourfellow too
and suffered my command.
What does he mean?
To make his followers weep.
Tend me tonight.
May be it is the period of yourduty.
Haply you shall not see me moreó
or if, a mangled shadow.
Perchance tomorrow you'll serveanother master.
I look on you as one that takeshis leave.
Mine honest friends, I turn younot away.
But like a master married toyour good service,
stay till death.
Tend me tonight two hours, I askno more.
And the gods yield you for it.
What mean you, sir, to give themthis discomfort?
Look, they weep.
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed.
For shame, transform us not towomen.
Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me if I meantit thus!
Oh.
Grace grow where those dropsfall!
My hearty friends, you take mein too dolorous a sense.
For I spake to you for yourcomfort,
did desire you to burn thisnight with torches.
Know, my hearts, I hope well oftomorrow
and will lead you where ratherI'll expect victorious life
than death and honor.
Let's to supper, come, and drownconsideration.
Eros! Mine armor, Eros!
Sleep a little.
No, my chuck.
Eros, come; mine armor, Eros!
Come good fellow, put mine ironon.
If fortune be not ours today,
it is because we brave her;come.
Nay, I'll help too.
What's this for?
Ah, let be, let be!
Thou art the armorer of myheart.
False, false; this, this.
Sooth, la, I'll help, thus itmust be.
Well, well, we shall thrive now.
Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go put on thy defences.
Briefly, sir.
Is not this buckled well?
Rarely, rarely.
He that unbuckles this till wedo please
to daff it for our repose shallhear a storm.
Thou fumblest, Eros.
My queen's a squire more tightat this than thou.
Dispatch.
O love, that thou could see mywars today
and knew'st the royaloccupation,
thou should see a workman in it.
The morn is fair. Good morrow,general.
This morning, like the spirit ofa youth
that means to be of note, beginsbetimes.
So, so; come, give me that.
Oh, oh, this way.
Fare thee well, dame.
Whatever becomes of me, this isa soldier's kiss.
He goes forth gallantly.
That he and Caesar mightdetermine this great war
in single fight, then Antonyó
But nowó Well, on.
The gods make this a happy dayto Antony.
Would thou and those thy scarshad once prevailed
to make me fight at land.
Hadst thou done so, the kingsthat have revolted
and the soldier that has thismorning left thee
would have still have followedyour heels.
Who's gone this morning?
Who?
One ever near thee.
Call for Enobarbus, he shall nothear thee
or from Caesar's camp, say, "Iam none of thine."
What say'st thou?
Sir, he is with Caesar.
Sir, his chests and treasure hehas not with him.
Is he gone?
Most certain.
Go, Eros; send his treasureafter.
Do it.
Detain no jot, I charge thee.
Write to him.
I will subscribe gentle adieusand greetings,
say that I wish he never findmore cause to change a master.
O my fortunes have corruptedhonest men!
Dispatch.
Enobarbus!
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin thefight.
Our will is Antony be tookalive.
Make it so known.
Caesar, I shall.
The time of universal peace isnear.
Prove this a prosperous day,
the three-nooked world shallbear the olive freely.
Antony is come into the field.
Go charge Agrippa.
Plant those that have revoltedin the van,
that Antony may seem to spendhis fury upon himself.
Enobarbus, Antony hath afterthee
sent all thy treasure with hisbounty overplus.
I give it you.
Mock not, Enobarbus.I tell youtrue.
Best you safed the bringer outof the host.
I must attend mine office orwould have done it myself.
Your emperor continues still aJove.
I am alone the villain of theearth,
and feel I am so most.
O Antony, thou mine of bounty,
how wouldst thou have paid mybetter service
when my turpitude thou dost socrown with gold.
This blows my heart.
If swift thought break it not,
a swifter mean shall outstrikethought.
But thought will do it, I feel.
I fight against thee.
No, I will go seek some ditchwherein to die.
The foulest best fits my latterpart of life.
We have beat him to his camp!
Run one before!
Let the queen know of our gests.
Tomorrow before the sun shallsee us,
we'll spill the blood that hastoday escaped.
Oh, I thank you all, fordoughty-handed are you
and have fought not as youserved the cause
but as it had been each man'slike mine.
You have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city, clip our wives,your friends.
Tell them your feats whilst theywith joyful tears
wash the congealment from yourwounds
and kiss the honored gasheswhole.
Lord of lords.
O infinite virtue,
comest thou smiling from theworld's great snare uncaught?
My nightingale, we have beatthem to their beds.
Behold this man.
Commend unto his lips thyfavoring hand.
Kiss it, my warrior!
He hath fought today as if a godin hate of mankind
had destroyed in such a shape.
I'll give thee, friend, an armorall of gold.
It was a king's.
He has deserved it,
were it carbuncled like holyPhoebus' car.
Give me thy hand.
Through Alexandria make a jollymarch.
Bear our hacked targets like themen that owe them.
Had our great palace thecapacity to camp this host?
We all would sup together anddrink carouses
to the next day's fate whichpromises royal peril.
Trumpeters,
with brazen din blast you thecity's ear.
Make mingle with rattlingtambourines,
that heaven and earth may striketheir sounds together,
applauding our approach.
O, bear me witness, night.
Be witness to me, O thou blessedmoon,
when men revolted shall uponrecord bear hateful memory,
poor Enobarbus did before thyface repent.
O sovereign mistress of truemelancholy,
the poisonous damp of nightdisponge upon me,
that life, a very rebel to mywill,
may hang no longer on me.
Throw my heart against the flintand hardness of my fault,
which, being dried with grief,will break to powder
and finish all foul thoughts.
O Antony, nobler than my revoltis infamous,
forgive me in thine ownparticular,
but let the world rank me inregister
a master-leaver and a fugitive.
O Antony!
Their preparation is today bysea.
We please them not by land.
For both, my lord.
I would they fight in the fireor in the air;
we'd fight there too.
But thus it is.
Our foot upon the hillsadjoining to the city
shall stay with us.
Order for sea is given.
They've put forth the haven,
where their appointment we maybest discover
and look on their endeavour.
But being charged, we will bestill by land,
which, as I take it, we shall,
for his best force is forth toman his galleys.
To the vales and hold our bestadvantage.
This foul Egyptian hath betrayedme.
My fleet hath yielded to thefoe,
and yonder they cast their capsup and carouse together
like friends long lost.
Triple-turned whore!
'Tis thou hast sold me to thisnovice!
And my heart makes only wars onthee.
Bid them all fly,
for when I am revenged upon mycharm, I have done all.
Bid them all fly; begone!
O sun, thy uprise shall I see nomore.
Fortune and Antony part here.
Even here do we shake hands.
All come to this?
The hearts that spanieled me atheels,
to whom I gave their wishes, dodiscandy,
melt their sweets on blossomingCaesar.
And this pine is barked thatovertopped them all.
Betrayed I am.
O this false soul of Egypt!
This grave charm whose eyebecked forth my wars
and called them home,
whose bosom was my crownet, mychief endó
like a right gypsy hath at fastand loose
beguiled me to the very heart ofloss.
What, Eros! Eros!
Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Why is my lord enraged againsthis love?
Vanish or I shall give thee thydeserving
and blemish Caesar's triumph.
Let him take thee
and hoist thee up to theshouting plebeians,
follow his chariot
like the greatest spot of allthy sex.
Oh, most monster-like be shown
for poorest diminutives fordoits;
and let patient Octavia plow thyvisage up
with her prepared nails.
'Tis well thou art gone.
If it be well to live,
but better 'twere thou fell'stinto my fury,
for one death might haveprevented many.
The witch shall die
to the young Roman boy she hathsold me,
and I fall under this plot.
She dies for it.
Help me, my women!
O, he is more mad than Telamonfor his shield.
The boar of Thessaly was neverso embossed.
To the monument.
There, lock yourself and sendhim word you are dead.
The soul and body rive not morein parting
than greatness going off.
To the monument.
Mardian, go tell him I haveslain myself.
Say that the last I spoke was"Antony,"
and word it prithee piteously.
Hence, Mardian, and bring me howhe takes my death.
To the monument!
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
Ay, noble lord.
Sometimes we see a cloud that'sdragonish,
a vapor sometime like a bear orlion,
a towered citadel, a pendentrock,
a forked mountain or bluepromontory with trees upon it,
that nod unto the world and mockour eyes with air.
Thou hast seen these signs.
They are black vesper'spageants.
Ay, my lord.
That which is now a horse, evenwith a thought,
the rack dislimns and makes itindistinct
as water is in water.
It does, my lord.
My good knave Eros,
now thy captain is even such abody.
Here I am Antony,
yet cannot hold this visibleshape.
My knave, I made these wars forEgypt.
And the queenó
whose heart I thought I had, forshe had mine,
which whilst it was mine hadannexed unto it a million more,
now lost.
She, Eros, has packed cards withCaesar
and false-played my glory untoan enemy's triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros.
There is left us ourselves toend ourselves.
O! Thy vile lady!
She has robbed me of my sword.
No, Antony.
My mistress loved thee,
and her fortunes mingled withthine entirely.
Hence, saucy eunuch; peace!
She hath betrayed me and shalldie the death.
Death of one person can be paidbut once,
and that she has discharged.
What thou wouldst do is doneunto thy hand.
The last she spoke was, "Antony!Most noble Antony!"
Then in the midst,
a tearing groan did break thename of Antony.
It was divided between her heartand lips.
She rendered life thy name soburied in her.
Dead, then?
Dead.
Unarm, Eros.
The long day's task is done, andwe must sleep.
Off, pluck off.
The seven-fold shield of Ajax
cannot keep the battery from myheart.
O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thycontinent,
crack thy frail case!
Apace, Eros, apace.
No more a soldier; bruisedpieces, go.
You have been nobly borne.
From me awhile.
I will overtake thee, Cleopatra,
and weep for my pardon.
So it must be, for now alllength is torture.
Since the torch is out, lie downand stray no farther.
Now all labor Mars what it does.
Yea, very force entangles itselfwith strength.
Seal then, and all is done.
Eros!
I come, my queen.
Stay for me.
Where souls do couch on flowers,
we'll hand-in-hand
and with our sprightly port makethe ghosts gaze.
Dido and her Aeneas shall wanttroops,
and all the haunt be ours.
Come, Eros, Eros!
What would my lord?
Since Cleopatra died, I havelived in such dishonor
that the gods detest mybaseness.
I, that with my sword quarteredthe world
and over green Neptune's backwith ships made cities,
condemn myself to lack thecourage of a woman.
Less noble mind than she whichby her death
our Caesar tells "I am conquerorof myself."
Thou art sworn, Eros,
that when the exigent shouldcome,
which now is come indeed,
when I should see behind me
the inevitable prosecution ofdisgrace and horror,
that on my command, thou thenwouldst kill me.
Do it; the time is come.
Thou strikest not me, 'tisCaesar thou defeat'st.
Put color in thy cheek.
The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all theParthian darts,
though enemy lost aim and couldnot?
Eros.
Wouldst thou be windowed ingreat Rome
and see thy master thus withpleached arms,
bending down his corrigibleneck,
his face subdued to penetrativeshame
whilst the wheeled seat offortunate Caesar
drawn before him,
branded his baseness thatensued?
I would not see it.
Come, then; for with a wound Imust be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword,
which thou hast worn most usefulfor thy country.
O, sir, pardon me!
When I did make thee free,
sworest thou not then to do thiswhen I bade thee?
Do it at once, or thy precedentservices
are all but accidentsunpurposed.
Draw and come.
Turn from me then, that noblecountenance,
wherein the worship of the wholeworld lies.
Lo thee!
My sword is drawn.
Then let it do at once the thingwhy thou hast drawn it!
My dear master, my captain, andmy emperor,
let me say, before I strike thisbloody stroke, farewell.
'Tis said, man; and farewell.
Farewell, great chief.
Shall I strike now?
Now, Eros.
Why, there then!
Thus do I escape the sorrow ofAntony's death.
Thrice nobler than myself!
Thou teachest me, O valiantEros,
what I should and thou couldstnot.
My queen and Eros have got uponme a nobleness in record,
but I will be a bridegroom in mydeath
and run into it as to a lover'sbed.
Come then.
And, Eros, thy master dies thyscholar.
To do thus, I learned of thee.
How nowónot dead? Not dead?
The guard, ho!
O, dispatch me!
What's the noise?
I have done my work in, friends.
Make an end of what I havebegun.
The star is fallen.
And time is at his period.
Alas, and woe!
Let him that loves me strike medead.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor anyone.
Where's Antony?
There, Alexas, there.
Lives he?
Will thou not answer, man?
Art thou there, Alexas?
Draw thy sword and give mesufficing strokes for death.
Most absolute lord,
my mistress Cleopatra sent me tothee.
When did she send thee?
Now, my lord.
Where is she?
Locked in her monument.
She had a prophesying fear ofwhat hath come to pass.
For when she sawó
which never shall be foundó
you did suspect she had disposedwith Caesar
and that your rage would not bepurged,
she sent you word she was dead.
But fearing since how it mightwork,
hath sent me to proclaim thetruth.
And I am come, I dread, toolate.
Too late, good Alexas.
Bear me, good friends, whereCleopatra bides.
It is the last service that Ishall command you.
I have led you oft.
Carry me now, good friends, andhave my thanks for all.
O Charmian, I will never go fromhence.
Be comforted, dear madam.
No, I will not.
All strange and terrible eventsare welcome,
but comforts we despise.
Our size of sorrow proportionedto our cause
must be as great as that whichmakes it.
How now!
Is he dead?
His death's upon him but notdead.
His guard have brought himhither.
O sun, burn the great spherethou movest in.
Darkling stand the varying shoreof the world.
O Antony.
Antony, Antony!
Help, Charmian, help.
Iras, help.
Help, friends below.
Let's draw him hither.
Peace.
Not Caesar's valor hathoverthrown Antony,
but Antony's hath triumphed onitself.
So it should be that none butAntony should conquer Antony.
But woe 'tis so!
I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Only I here importune deathawhile
until of many thousand kisses
the poor last I lay upon thylips.
I dare not, dear.
Dear my lord, pardon,
I dare not, lest I be taken.
Not the imperious show of thefull-fortuned Caesar
ever shall be broached with me.
If knife, drugs, serpents haveedge, sting, or operation,
I am safe.
Your wife Octavia,
with her modest eyes and stillconclusion,
shall acquire no honor demuringupon demurringe.
Come, come, Antony.
Help me, my women.
We must draw thee up.
Assist, good friends.
O, quick or I am gone.
Here's sport indeed!
How heavy weighs my lord.
Our strength is all gone intoheaviness
that makes the weight.
Had I great Juno's power,
the strong-winged Mercury shouldfetch thee up
and set thee by Jove's side.
Yet come a little.
Wishes were ever fools.
O, come, come, come.
And welcome, welcome!
Die where thou hast lived.
Quicken with kissing.
Had my lips that power, thuswould I wear them out.
A heavy sight!
I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Give me some wine, and let mespeak a little.
No, let me speak.
And let me rail so high
that the false housewife Fortunebreak her wheel,
provoked by my offence.
One word, sweet queen.
Of Caesar, seek your honor withyour safety.
They do not go together.
Gentle, hear me.
None about Caesar trust butProculeius.
My resolution and my hands I'lltrust.
None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at myend.
Lament nor sorrow at,
but please thy thoughts infeeding them
with those my former fortunes
wherein I lived the greatestprince of the whole world,
the noblest and do now notbasely die,
not cowardly put off my helmetto my countrymanó
a Roman by a Romanó valiantlyvanquished.
Now my spirit is going.
I can no more.
Noblest of men, woo't die?
Hast thou no care of me?
Shall I abide in this dullworld,
which in thy absence is nobetter than a sty?
O, see, my women.
The crown of the earth dothmelt.
My lord!
O, withered is the garland ofthe war!
The soldier's pole is fallen.
Young boys and girls are levelnow with men.
The odds is gone,
and there is nothing leftremarkable
beneath the visiting moon.
O, quietness, lady!
She's dead too, our sovereign.
Lady!
Madam!
O madam, madam, madam!
Royal Egypt Empress!
Peace, peace, Iras!
No more but even a woman
and commanded by such poorpassion
as the maid that milks and doesthe meanest chares.
It were for me to throw myscepter at the injurious gods,
to tell them that this world didequal theirs
till they had stolen our jewel.
All's but naught.
Patience is sottish,
and impatience does become a dogthat's mad.
Then is it sin to rush into thesecret house of death?
Ere death dare come to us?
How do you, women?
What, what! Good cheer!
Why, how now, Charmian!
My noble girls!
Ah, women, women, look, our lampis spent.
It's out.
Good sirs, take heart.
We'll bury him.
And then what's brave, what'snoble,
let's do it after the high Romanfashion
and make death proud to take us.
Come. Away.
This case of that huge spiritnow is cold.
Ah, women, women!
Come.
We have no friend but resolution
and the briefest end.
Go to him, Dolabella; bid himyield.
Being so frustrate,
tell him he mocks the pausesthat he makes.
Caesar, I shall.
Wherefore is that?
And what art thou that darestappear thus to us?
I am called Dercetas.
Mark Antony I served,
who best was worthy, best to beserved.
Whilst he stood up and spoke, hewas my master.
And I wore my life to spend uponhis haters.
If thou please to take me tothee,
as I was to him I'll be toCaesar.
If thou pleasest not, I yieldthee up my life.
What is it thou say'st?
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
The breaking of so great a thingshould make a greater crack.
The round world should haveshook lions into civil streets
and citizens to their dens.
The death of Antony is not asingle doom.
In the name lay a moiety of theworld.
He is dead, Caesar.
Not by a public minister ofjustice
nor by a hired knife
but that self hand,
which writ his honor in the actsit did,
hath, with the courage which theheart did lend it,
splitted the heart.
This is his sword; I robbed hiswound of it.
Behold it stained with his mostnoble blood.
Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me,
but it is tidings to wash theeyes of kings.
And strange it is that naturemust compel us
to lament our most persisteddeeds.
His taints and honors wagedequal with him.
A rarer spirit never did steerhumanity.
But you, gods, will give us somefaults to make us men.
Caesar is touched.
When such a spacious mirror'sset before him,
he needs must see himself.
O Antony!
I have followed thee to this.
But we do lance diseases in ourbodies.
I must perforce have shown tothee such a declining day
or looked on thine.
We could not stall together inthe whole world,
but yet let me lament
with tears as sovereign as theblood of hearts
that thou, my brother,
my competitor in top of alldesign,
my mate in empire,
friend and companion in thefront of war,
the arm of mine own body
and the heart where mine histhoughts did kindle.
That our stars, unreconcilable,
should divide our equalness tothis.
Hear me, good friends.
But I will tell you at somemeeter season.
The business of this man looksout of him.
We'll hear him what he says.
Whence are you?
A poor Egyptian yet.
The queen, my mistress,
confined in all she has, hermonument,
of thy intents desiresinstruction
that she preparedly may frameherself
to the way she's forced to.
Bid her have good heart.
She soon shall know of us, bysome of ours,
wow honorable and how kindly wedetermine for her.
For Caesar cannot learn to beungentle.
So the gods preserve thee!
Come hither, Proculeius.
Go and say, we purpose her noshame.
Give her what comforts
the quality of her passion shallrequire.
Lest, in her greatness,
by some mortal stroke she dodefeat us.
For her life in Rome would beeternal in our triumph.
Go, and with your speediestbring us what she saysó
How you find of her.
Caesar, I shall.
Where's Dolabella to secondProculeius?
Dolabella!
Let him alone, for I remembernow how he's employed.
He shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent
where you shall see how hardly Iwas drawn into this war,
how calm and gentle I proceededstill in all my writings.
Go with me and see what I canshow in this.
My desolation does begin to makea better life.
'Tis paltry to be Caesar.
Not being Fortune, he's butFortune's knave,
a minister of her will.
And it is great to do that thingthat ends all other deeds
which shackles accidents andbolts up change,
which sleeps and never palatesmore the dug.
The beggar's nurse and Caesar's.
Caesar sends greeting to theQueen of Egypt
and bids thee study on what fairdemands
thou means to have him grantthee.
What's thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Antony did tell me of you;
bade me trust you.
But I do not greatly care to bedeceived
that have no use for trusting.
If your master would have aqueen his beggar,
you must tell him
that majesty, to keep decorum,must no less beg than a kingdom.
If he please to give meconquered Egypt for my son,
he gives me so much of mine own
as I will kneel to him withthanks.
Be of good cheer.
You're fallen into a princelyhand.
Fear nothing.
Make your full reference freelyto my lord,
who is so full of grace that itflows over on all that need.
Let me report to him your sweetdependency,
and you shall find a conqueror
that will pray in aid forkindness,
where he for grace is kneeledto.
Pray you, tell him I am hisfortune's vassal,
and I send him the greatness hehas got.
I hourly learn a doctrine ofobedience
and would gladly look him im theface.
This I'll report, dear lady.
Have comfort,
for I know your plight is pitiedof him that caused it.
O Cleopatra!
Thou art taken, queen!
Quick, quick, good hands.
Hold, worthy lady, hold.
Do not yourself such wrong,
who are in this relieved but notbetrayed.
What of death, too, that ridsour dogs of languish?
Cleopatra!
Do not abuse my master's bountyby the undoing of yourself.
Let the world see his noblenesswell acted,
which your death will never letcome forth.
Where art thou, death?
Come hither, come!
Come, come, and take a queenworth many babes and beggars!
O, temperance, lady!
Sir, I will eat no meat.
I'll not drink, sir.
If idle talk will once benecessary,
I'll not sleep neither.
This mortal house I'll ruin!
Do Caesar what he can.
Know, sir,
that I will not wait pinioned atyour master's court
nor once be chastised with thesober eye of dull Octavia.
Shall they hoist me up
and show me to the shoutingvarletry of censuring Rome?
Rather a ditch in Egypt begentle grave unto me!
Rather on Nilus' mud lay mestark naked
and let the water flies blow meinto abhorring!
Rather make my country's highpyramides my gibbet
and hang me up in chains!
You do extend these thoughts ofhorror
further than you shall findcause in Caesar.
Proculeius,
what thou hast done thy masterCaesar knows,
and he hath sent for thee.
For the queen, I'll take her tomy guard.
So, Dolabella.
It shall content me best; begentle to her.
To Caesar I will speak what youshall please,
if you'll employ me to him.
Say, I would die.
Most noble empress, you haveheard of me?
I cannot tell.
Assuredly you know me.
No matter, sir, what I haveheard or known,
you laugh when boys or womentell their dreams.
Is it not your trick?
I understand not, madam.
I dreamt there was an EmperorAntony.
O, such another sleep,
that I might see but suchanother man!
If it might please yeó
His face was as the heavens
and therein stuck a sun andmoon,
which kept their course
and lighted the little O of theearth.
Most sovereign creatureó
His legs bestrid the ocean.
His reared arm crested theworld.
His voice was propertied as allthe tuned spheres,
and that to friends.
But when he meant to quail andshake the orb,
he was as rattling thunder.
For his bounty, there was nowinter in it.
An autumn 'twas that grew themore by reaping.
His delights were dolphin-like.
They showed his back above theelement they lived in.
In his livery walked crowns andcrownets.
Realms and islands were asplates dropped from his pocket.
Cleopatra!
Think you there was or might besuch a man
as this I dreamt of?
Gentle madam, no.
You lie up to the hearing of thegods.
But if there be or ever were onesuch,
it's past the size of dreaming.
Nature wants stuff to viestrange forms with fancy,
yet to imagine an Antony werenature's piece against fancy,
condemning shadows quite.
Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is as yourself great.
And you bear it as answering tothe weight.
Would I might never o'ertakepursued success,
but I do feel by the rebound ofyours
a grief that smites my veryheart at root.
I thank you, sir,
Know you what Caesar means to dowith me?
I am loath to tell you what Iwould you knew.
Nay, pray you, siró
Though he be honorableó
He'll lead me then in triumph?
Madam, he will; I know it.
Arise, you shall not kneel.
I pray you, rise.
Rise, Egypt.
Sir, the gods will have it thus.
My master and my lord I mustobey.
Take to you no hard thoughts.
The record of what injuries youdid us,
though written in our flesh,
we shall remember as things butdone by chance.
Sole sir of the world,
I cannot project mine own causeso well to make it clear,
but do confess I have been ladenwith like frailties
which before have often shamedour sex.
Cleopatra, know we willextenuate rather than enforce.
If you apply yourself to ourintents,
which towards you are mostgentle,
you shall find a benefit in thischange.
But if you seek to lay on me acruelty,
by taking Antony's course,
you shall bereave yourself of mygood purposes
and put your children to thatdestruction
which I'll guard them from ifthereon you rely.
I'll take my leave.
And may, through all the world;'tis yours.
And we, your scutcheons and yoursigns of conquest,
shall hang in what place youplease.
Here, my good lord.
You shall advise me in all forCleopatra.
This is the brief of money,plate, and jewels,
I am possessed of.
'Tis exactly valued, not pettythings admitted.
Still be it yours.
Bestow it at your pleasure.
And believe Caesar's no merchant
to make prize with you of thingsthat merchants sold.
Therefore, be cheered.
Make not your thoughts yourprisons.
No, dear queen.
For we intend so to dispose you
as yourself shall give uscounsel.
Feed and sleep.
Our care and pity is so muchupon you
that we remain your friend.
And so adieu.
My master and my lord.
Not so. Adieu.
He words me, girls; he words me.
That I should not be noble tomyself.
But, hark thee, Charmian.
Finish, good lady.
The bright day is done, and weare for the dark.
Hie thee again.
I have spoke already, and it isprovided.
Go put it to the haste.
Madam, I will.
Where is the queen?
Behold, sir.
Dolabella!
Madam, as thereto sworn by yourcommand,
which my love makes religion toobey,
I tell you this:
Caesar through Syria intends hisjourney.
And within three days,
you with your children will hesend before.
Make your best use of this.
I have performed your pleasureand my promise.
Dolabella, I shall remain yourdebtor.
I, your servant.
Adieu, good queen.
I must attend on Caesar.
Farewell and thanks.
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou, an Egyptian puppet,
shall be shown in Rome as wellas Ió
mechanic slaves with greasyaprons,
rules and hammers shall upliftus to the view.
In their thick breaths,.rank ofgross diet
shall be enclouded and forced todrink their vapour.
O the good gods.
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras.
Saucy lictors will catch at uslike strumpets
and scald rhymers ballad us outof tune.
The quick comedians extemporallywill stage us
and present our Alexandrianrevels.
Antony shall be brought drunkenforth,
and I shall see some squeakingCleopatra boy my greatness
in the posture of a whore.
O the good gods!
Nay, that's certain.
I'll never see it.
For I am sure my nails arestronger than mine eyes.
Why, that's the way to fooltheir preparation
and to conquer their most absurdintents.
Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen.
Go fetch my best attires.
I am again for Cydnus to meetMark Antony.
Sirrah Iras, go.
Now, noble Charmian, we'lldispatch indeed.
And when thou hast done thischare,
I'll give thee leave to playtill doomsday.
Bring our crown and all.
Wherefore's this noise?
Here is a rural fellow
that will not be denied yourhighness presence.
He brings you figs.
Let him come in.
What poor an instrument may do anoble deed.
He brings me liberty.
My resolution's placed,
and I have nothing of woman inme now.
From head to foot I ammarble-constant.
Now the fleeting moon; no planetis of mine.
This is the man.
Avoid and leave him.
Hast thou the pretty worm ofNilus there
that kills and pains not?
Truly, I have him,
but I would not be the party
that should desire you to touchhim,
for his biting is immortal.
Those that do die of it doseldom or never recover.
Rememberest thou any that havedied on it?
Very manyó men and women too.
I heard of one of them onlyyesterday.
A very honest woman, butsomething given to lie
as a woman should not do but inthe way of honesty.
How she died of the biting ofit,
what pain she felt,
truly, she made very good reportof the worm.
But this is most fallible.
The worm's an odd worm.
Get thee hence; farewell.
I wish you joy of the worm.
Farewell.
You must think this, look you,
that the worm will do his kind.
Ay, ay; farewell.
Look you, the worm is not to betrusted
but in the keeping of wisepeople,
for, indeed, there is nogoodness in the worm.
Take thou no care; it shall beheeded.
Very good.
Give it nothing, I pray you,
for it's not worth the feeding.
Will it eat me?
You must not think I am sosimple,
but I know the devil himselfwill not eat a woman.
I know that a woman is a dishfor the gods
if the devil dresses her not.
But, truly, these same whoresondevils
do the gods great harm in theirwomen,
for in every ten that they make,the devils mar five.
Well, get thee gone; farewell.
Yes, forsooth.
I wish you joy of the worm.
Give me my robe.
Put on my crown.
I have immortal longings in me.
Now no more the juice of Egypt'sgrape shall moist this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras.
Quick.
Methinks I hear Antony call.
I see him rouse himself topraise my noble act.
I hear him mock the luck ofCaesar,
which the gods give men toexcuse their after wrath.
Husband, I come.
Now to that name my courageprove my title.
I am fire and air.
My other elements I give tobaser life.
So; have you done?
Come then and take the lastwarmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian.
Iras, long farewell.
Have I the aspic in my lips?
Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gentlypart,
the stroke of death is as alover's pinch,
which hurts and is desired.
Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest,
thou tell'st the world it is notworth leave-taking.
Dissolve thick cloud and rain,
that I may say the godsthemselves do weep.
This proves me base.
If she first meet the curledAntony,
he'll make demand of her andspend that kiss
which is my heaven to have.
Come, thou mortal wretch.
With thy sharp teeth
this knot intrinsicate of lifeat once untie.
Poor venomous fool, be angry anddispatch.
Peace, peace.
Dost thou not see my baby at mybreast
that sucks the nurse asleep?
O, break!
As sweet as balm,
as soft as air,
as gentleó
O Antony!
Nay, I will take thee too.
What should I stayó
In this vile world?
So fare thee well.
Now boast thee, death,
in thy possession lies a lassunparalleled.
Downy windows close,
and golden Phoebus never bebeheld of eyes again so royal.
Your crown's awry.
I'll mend it and then play.
Where is the queen?
Speak softly, wake her not.
Caesar hath sentó
Too slow a messenger.
O, come apace, dispatch!
I partly feel thee.
What work is here?
Charmian, is this well done?
It is well done and fitting fora princess
descended of so many royalkings.
How goes it here?
All dead.
Caesar, thy thoughts touch theireffects in this.
Thyself art coming to seeperformed the dreaded act
which thou so sought'st tohinder.
O sir, you are too sure anaugurer.
That you did fear is done.
Bravest at the last, she leveledat our purposes,
and, being royal, took her ownway.
The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.
Who was last with them?
A simple countryman that broughther figs.
This was his basket.
If she had swallowed poison,
'twould appear by externalswelling,
but she looks like sleep
as she would catch anotherAntony
in her strong toil of grace.
Here, on her breast.
There is a vent of blood andsomething blown.
The like is on her arm.
This is an aspic's trail,
and these fig leaves have slimeupon them,
such as the aspic leaves uponthe caves of Nile.
Most probable that so she died.
For her physician tells me
she hath pursued conclusionsinfinite of easy ways to die.
Take up her bed
and bear her women from themonument.
She shall be buried by herAntony.
No grave upon the earth shallclip in it a pair so famous.
High events as these strikethose that make them,
and their story is no less inpity than his glory
which brought them to belamented.
Our army shall in solemn showattend this funeral
and then to Rome.
Come, Dolabella,
see high order in this greatsolemnity.